ML-KEM documentation (#26037)
openssl/openssl: doc/designs/mlkem.md

If we wanted to do just-in-time matrix computation for decapsulation, we'd need to have
a different memory layout for public keys when only the public key is known, and to change
the algorithm code to generate matrix elements on demand during encapsulation. This can
be considered later, if it is determined that the space savings (9*512 bytes in memory for
ML-KEM-768, for the full matrix, instead of 512 bytes for a just-in-time element) this could
be considered later, but the server will generally destroy the client public key soon after the
shared secret is computed, so these don't stay in memory long, so briefly saving ~2KB may
not to be of much benefit).

The private key format is somewhat ad hoc, though (to be able to fully describe the algorithms)
FIPS 203 documents a format that is commonly referred to as the "extended"
format and also exportable/importable via encoding functions in well-defined
sizes. The IETF voices interest in using the "seed-based" format (the (d,z) seed
pair from which the key is generated and can be recovered). This is supported by the
FIPS 203 internal deterministic key generation functions, which are "testing only".

> We naturally use for running the Known Answer Tests, but are private key encoding

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We naturally use this for running the Known Answer Tests, but our private key encoding
```

format is the full expanded key, not the 64 byte (d,z) seed pair.

The design therefore caters for both options: The default key generation and
KEM encapsulation/decapsulation functions operate on/with "extended keys".
It is also possible to use the "seed-based" format by way of providing
specific OSSL_PARAMs made available for that purpose -- but again, as per
NIST guidance, only for testing. If the seed version is retrieved from a
normal key generation operation, it shall be subject to the same level of
protection given to private key material.

Key generation API
------------------

Keys can therefore be generated as "usual" by way of the EVP functions
EVP_PKEY_generate() and EVP_PKEY_Q_keygen().

> The "seed format" can be selected by either setting the OSSL_PARAM value

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The "seed format" can be selected by setting the OSSL_PARAM value
```

The design therefore caters for both options: The default key generation and
KEM encapsulation/decapsulation functions operate on/with "extended keys".
It is also possible to use the "seed-based" format by way of providing
specific OSSL_PARAMs made available for that purpose -- but again, as per
NIST guidance, only for testing. If the seed version is retrieved from a
normal key generation operation, it shall be subject to the same level of
protection given to private key material.

Key generation API
------------------

Keys can therefore be generated as "usual" by way of the EVP functions
EVP_PKEY_generate() and EVP_PKEY_Q_keygen().

The "seed format" can be selected by either setting the OSSL_PARAM value
"OSSL_PKEY_PARAM_MLKEM_SEED" before key generation or retrieving it
after key generation.

KEM API
-------

ML-KEM is meant to be a simple replacement for existing KEM algorithms.
Therefore, simple use should be

EVP_PKEY_encapsulate_init(), EVP_PKEY_encapsulate(),
EVP_PKEY_decapsulate_init(), EVP_PKEY_decapsulate().

For the encapsulation operation, a test-only option exists to avoid the
otherwise mandatory use of a random number generator for passing in a

> known "entropy" by way of the OSSL_PARAM "OSSL_KEM_PARAM_MLKEM_ENC_ENTROPY".

Reviewer 2: Over in #25990 I'm changing this parameter to `OSSL_KEM_PARAM_IKME` (_"ikme"_) so it aligns with the similar option used by the ECX algorithms.

It's not clear if it would be better to change it here too (before either merges).

Author: Thanks for the head-up.

> It's not clear if it would be better to change it here too (before either merges).

My proposal would be to adapt this PR to whatever #25990 winds up encoding and merge it only at the end (when consensus has built what makes most sense/is most coherent with the pre-existing code base).

Author: Thanks for the heads-up (and letting me know about #25990 :)!

> It's not clear if it would be better to change it here too (before either merges).

My thinking was to adapt this PR to whatever #26054 winds up encoding and merge it only at the end (when consensus has built what makes most sense/is most coherent with the new and the pre-existing code base). But I'd also be fine closing this PR if either you or @vdukhovni also want to add the documentation to #26054 straight.

Reviewer 2: I've pulled my changes out into #26082 which is likely to merge quickly.
I also fixed some bugs in the new evp_test KEM code.

Author: FYI @paulidale we decided to merge this pretty much as-is to close out a sprint and then change docs again as new code lands.

Reviewer 3: OK, we'll need to remember to do that. The parameter name will in fact soon be: `OSSL_KEM_PARAM_IKME`.
Here, I'd have been tempted to just get it over with, and replace the name with that.
